10 seconds before it starts recording this is may
the 12th and we're looking out on a cloudy sky from
the breakfast area i'm chatting with ann rudder
erdman we've been acquainted for almost 40 years
now and chatting with her about her experiences
here, particularly seeking information about
the role, the key role her father played at Texas
A&M. You all moved to College Station in 1958.
And you were getting ready to be what year in
school? It was back to the middle of my sophomore
year. In high school? In high school. Describe, as
far as you recall, the reactions of the family at
moving here. we weren't real sure what we were
getting into. A&M,
I can remember my brother coming to A&M with dad,
but none of the three daughters had been here. And
so we really were not, we just weren't sure. As far
as you are able to recall, what did your dad think he
was coming to do? What was his task? He didn't
discuss that with me. He didn't discuss it. I know
he was very excited about coming. Now he had been
land commissioner, and I know had cleaned up a real
first class mess that his predecessor had
created. And he had earned the high regard of
Governor Alan Shivers. Shivers, uh-huh. All
right, now before, your dad was born where? Eden,
Texas. Eden, and went to high school? Eden. and
then to Tarleton, JTAC, and then here two years.
And your mom grew up... In Menard. In Menard. Which
was the next county to Eden. And she went to high
school... In Menard. And then to the University of
Texas. And then to the University of Texas. Now,
I've heard that she was an acquaintance, had
friends named Connelly. She did. Did she know
both? And Jake Pickle. She and Jake were really
good friends. The later, the congressman from the
Austin area.
Was she acquainted with Nellie? Yes. And then your
parents meet when? Most can give you better
details. My dad had an older brother. And who was
about, dad was six years older than mother. And so I
think that the story is that mother first saw dad's
picture in an annual. But then after she finished
at Texas, she wound up teaching in Brady where dad
was coaching. So. Oh, now see, I'm glad you,
because I had been told by somebody that they met
when he was teaching and coaching and she was a high
school student? No. I don't think so. So what was
she teaching? Well, what would be the least thing
you'd ever guess that she would teach? I don't
know. P.E. P.E.? Oh, okay. And she took P.E., what
is the story, something that her brother-in-law
was a coach. And he said she didn't have to take math
or a foreign language if she studied PE and it
sounded fine. Right. Your dad was coaching and he
was, what did he teach? I think they taught
everything. Now this was at what high school? At
Brady High School. At Brady. Uh-huh. And then he
goes away to the war, comes back. He actually goes
to Tarleton first. Oh, that's right. For Brady, he
got appointed. In fact, I remember one time he said
that was... That was the only job he really worked
for. Oh. Was to get that coaching job at Tarleton.
Right. Was he the head coach? Uh-huh. In football?
Uh-huh. And was he doing that when the war started?
Uh-huh. Oh. Oh. All right, and let's see, your
memory is not yet there, is it? No, my brother, two
years older, was born in Stephenville while they
were at Tarleton. And then by the time I was born in
1942, I was born at Brooke General, so he was
already then in the service. Okay. And when your
dad comes back from the service, where'd y'all
live during the war? In Braden. Excuse me, uh-huh,
in a little house on South Bridge Street. with the
traffic light in town just outside the window. And
the family consisted during the war of how many
children? Just two. And that was when we became Bud
and Sis because it was James Earl Jr. and my whole
name is Margaret Ann. And that was too long to write
on the little, what do they call the letters during
the war? Email. Was it email? I started to say that.
It was email. Female. Female. Female. That's it.
Okay. Female. Okay, yeah. And so my brother at
nearly 60 is still Bud Rudder, but I'm not cis
anymore. But you were cis for a while. Well, in
fact, until I left grade when I was 12, and all the
family will still call me that. Oh, I can identify
with that, because up in Garland, where I lived
until I was 10, my dad was Hack, and I was Hack Jr.,
Oh, really? To old-timers. Nobody gives
nicknames anymore. Everybody used to have
nicknames. Okay. You all move here. Do you recall
your parents'
unspoken feelings? Were they eager? Glad? What do
you think was there? I think Mother was a little
reluctant because she had longed to return to
Austin, and she was really happy there.
But it really wasn't questioned, it wasn't. And my
dad was one that mother would often say that he
doesn't, she would hear things from her friends
about goings on on campus before she would hear
from him. So he truly didn't talk about, Dad would
never bring a pencil home from the office. So the
fact that he didn't bring tails or events is really
not a surprise. He very much,
the office was office and home was home. You said
you had not been here to visit. So the first time you
come to College Station is when y'all are actually
moving? And you moved into the big, old,
Victorian... Wonderful, wonderful old house.
All right, so you liked it from the first? Oh, from
the very first. Make believe that I have never seen
it. Describe it for me. It was two stories. It had
great porches across the front on the first floor
and the second floor. You walk inside and the
carpet is deep maroon with a big staircase that
goes up and a big grand piano underneath the
staircase on the first floor. There's an
elevator. Apparently one of the previous
president's wives was an invalid. And this little
elevator, there of course was not a shaft below the
first floor, and the safety regulations were not
in place so you could actually, if someone was
upstairs coming down, you could open the door on
the first floor and stand underneath and it would
stop the pressure on your head. It just was
wonderful. The grounds were beautiful, and it was
just across from the chapel, the off-base chapel,
and the fountain. And then to the east of it was
Sabisa. Describe how many rooms down and up. Oh,
there were three
parlors, maybe two parlors. and a fireplace in one
of the parlors and a fireplace in the study at the
corner. And the study at the corner is where I spent
most of it. Usually I was studying after everybody
went to bed. And I kind of had it to myself down there
in the fire. There was a huge dining room with a
mural on the wallpaper. And you don't see perhaps
how many? Oh, goodness, I don't know. I've got
pictures of dinners that I brought girlfriends
over, and I mean easily, more than a dozen, yeah,
14, 16. Kitchen? Big kitchen, big kitchen, and
there were always two people, always black, who
were working there on campus. There would be a
gentleman who would do the sweeping and lay the
fires and outside things. Upstairs, how many
vendors? Upstairs, one for my younger brother, a
guest room, mother and dad's room, and then it had,
there was a seating area off of that where the TV
went. In these days of the TV in every room, that's
kind of fun to remember. And then my two younger
sisters shared a room, and then my room was at the
very back. Now was there a basement? No basement.
But there was a back stairs. Was an outdoor back
stairs? No. An indoor back stairs? Uh-huh. There
were two staircases inside. An attic? There was an
attic. I don't remember because that's where the
fire started. Oh, okay. That's where the fire
started because of the mortar and the bricks.
We'll get back to the fire. And this was the biggest
house y'all ever lived in. Oh, goodness. I think
all of our furniture fit in the upstairs. Was it
fully furnished by the university? Downstairs it
was, and I think even mostly upstairs. We didn't
really have a whole lot. There were the five kids in
our family.
So when y'all arrived, your oldest brother was an
A&M student. Actually, he must have been
finishing his last year at Schreiner. So you're
the oldest of the children at home. Yes. And you
were a high school... Sophomore. Sophomore. And
it wasn't my car, but mother and dad got a car. And it
was maroon and white, and it was a little Dodge. And
it was one of those that had the gear system that you
sort of shifted but you didn't have to. There's a
name for it. But that way then I could take my
brothers, younger brothers and sisters to
school. It was really never considered my car and I
didn't take it to the University of Texas. But it
was a car that I drove the kids in. So you then go to
A&M Consolidated, then the high school building
on Jersey Street, as we then named it, right across
from the campus. What was it like for you adjusting
to a new school? It was interesting hearing you
talk about your son being a junior when you moved to
El Paso. Because I thought when you were telling
that, that's just about the age I was. Now, I moved
from a much bigger school in Austin. here.
I have the best feelings about the memories from
then. Mother and Dad were made so welcome. I was
made so welcome. Who were some of the people that
deserve a note, a pat on the back for working on that
welcome? Well, yeah, as far as Mother and Dad are
concerned, the board, of course. The deans, all of
the deans at the time, you know, the that group of
deans and their wives were always wonderful. At
the high school, Mr. Osment was the principal.
That's O-Z-N-E-N-T. I think it was E-P Osment. I
moved there, I moved there the middle of my
sophomore year. By the end of the year, I'd been
elected cheerleader and sophomore favorite. And
I know that this was in part because of mother and
dad. But I just was made, I was absolutely included
and made welcome from the very beginning. And I
remember somebody very important to me was Bob
Boone, who was the choir director at the time at the
high school. And he said, do you, you know, you've,
okay, big deal. You've gotten yourself here and
you've gotten elected. do you know the name of
every student in the high school? I said, well, of
course I don't. Don't be silly. He said, until you
learn every name, you don't deserve the honor of
representing them. So a lot of, yeah, I've just...
And did anybody ever tease you that you'd come from
Austin, from enemy territory or anything? Sure.
Oh, okay. And even though I wound up going to the
University of Texas, I was never really a
flag-waving Longhorn. And those board members,
you said, that welcomed your dad, are there any
that you recall that really were at the top of the
list of those who were most cordial, most
welcoming? Oh, not that I can, you know, and I'm not
sure that I could recall who was here when Dad first
came, or then, you know, then later, you know,
people like Mr. Quittenberg. But he was always
very, very respectful of their position in
relation to his position. Now, as I understand it,
when he first came, His title was something like
Executive Vice President for a brief time, and
then he became President. Is that as you recall?
So, as far as you recall, when your parents moved,
he clearly understood that he was going to be the
President. I just wasn't privy to those
conversations. I just know that, in fact, I've
said to my sons, I would wish for you the joy in
whatever you choose to do, that you found the joy
that my dad had in getting up and going to work every
day. He got up, he walked two blocks down to the Koch
building, and whenever he was done, he came home.
I'm not sure what all he did there.
But he did, he did love doing it. Were you aware, you
said he didn't bring office problems home, were
you aware as a child at home that his travel
schedule sometimes was hectic? Oh sure, oh sure.
Alright, let's see. Describe your reaction of
being on the campus. Because you're here two
years? Uh-huh, two and a half. Two and a half.
Describe your reaction to living on the campus and
living in this town. Well, I just have such fond
memories. I can remember a couple of times. One
time I can remember, just Dad and I were in the car
going somewhere. And I said, you know, there's one
thing that really bothers me. And I said, people
have such expectations of me because of you. And I
don't like it. And he said, well, you know, I
understand how that can happen. And he said, maybe
what you need to think about are all the good
things. that have come to our family. And
things you've gotten to do and places you've
gotten to be that wouldn't have happened had we
not. And let's see, I think you've mentioned to me
before, you did not mind the thought of being a
young lady living on the campus where there were
all these young men. Dating was sort of
interesting, because I could come in, and back
then, you either dated the high school boys or you
dated the A&M boys. You really couldn't date both.
And my dad was very much a believer that if you're in
high school, you date high school boys. And if I
would date someone a year or two older who
graduated, then I could no longer date him,
because he was then an Aggie or whatever, or worse.
So sometimes it'd be kind of funny, like if I was
coming in, because you had to park at the side and
then walk across the whole front of the house on the
porch to get to the front door. And people would
yell. And I can remember some girlfriends and I
decided one weekend that we could sunbathe on the
second floor. And nobody would know. Well, that
wasn't the case either. We had, I guess, gotten the
suntan stuff all over us and stretched out, and the
first time we turned over, there was a whole row
over across the street watching from the chapel
grounds. There was a university policeman who was
always stationed right at the corner of the, the
fountain. And as I was always running a little
late, out of the driveway and around that corner,
he would always jump up on the curb. Do you remember
any attempted student pranks around the
president's house? No, no, and by the time some of
the serious pranks that you hear about, I was
already gone. No, I really don't. At that time, we
always had the bulldog, and there was a place out by
the garage that was a yard for the dog. When we first
came here, girls were still wearing petticoats,
adrenaline's. And I remember the horror of
thinking that those were going to have to be hung
out to dry in full view. But as it turned out, even
kind of the laundry area was hedged so that it
really wasn't in full view. But those are just some
of the things. And Dad was always, you know, you
just didn't step outside unless you were properly
dressed or you didn't, you know. Things like that
really were stressed. Now, could you have a bunch
of high school friends over for a Friday night or
Saturday night? Yeah, I could. They didn't always
behave. I remember having a slumber party, and
that was back in the baby doll pajama days, and some
of my friends and my girlfriends ran outside to
watch the boys march to breakfast. And I was like,
And
let's see, where did you and your high school
friends go on a Friday night or a Saturday night for
a good time? Oh, mostly we went to the school
library and danced. And if it wasn't, you know,
every ball game we always danced at the library and
we decorated that afternoon. And if we didn't do
that, we'd go to each other's houses. Manning
Smith and Nita Smith, their son was in my class, so
dancing was a big deal. I can remember going to the
school parking lot, and the cars would all turn
their lights on. We'd turn the music up and dance.
So we did a lot of... Now, did high school kids in
your day drink beer? Very few. I don't remember
ever being around a beer in high school. Do you
remember... and whiskey was hard to get in this
county. So drunkenness was not a high school
problem in those days. A few of the boys smoked
cigarettes. That was kind of a big deal back then.
And you hadn't even heard the words that we now know
about the various drugs. No. Let alone, you hadn't
seen it. I remember maybe like after my senior year
of high school going to a party and coming in and And
dad was always, he met me at the door downstairs
when I came in, and as he was hugging me up the
stairs, he was, you've been smoking cigarettes,
sister. And I said, no, dad, I haven't. He said,
somebody has drowned you. You know, it was, my
sisters tell a funny story of even when they got
into what we called the new house. And my sister was
a few minutes late and came in and whoever her date
was at the night thought he was being funny saying,
and he just sort of yelled, said, hey Earl, we're
home. Not knowing that dad, the window was open and
dad yells out saying, fine, get her off. Oh, good,
good. That's a good one. Now, any of those
anecdotes for your life. Let's see, for you in high
school, did you have certain hours you were
expected to be in by? Oh, sure. Oh, sure. Well, of
course, I went from high school to Littlefield
Dorm at the University of Texas, and it was 10
o'clock curfew there, and maybe 12 on the
weekends. I'm sure my curfews were 9.30 or 10, and
no dating during the week. When I first got here,
Colonel Davis was here, and his son was two years
older, Stedman Davis. And so Stedman and I kind of
chummed up. We were both on campus. And I can
remember when, just had been here a little while,
and I came home from school, and he'd invited me to
go get a Coke at Triangle. And I said, dad, Stephen
Davis is downstairs. And my dad said, what in the
hell is he doing here at this time of day? And by the
time I got back downstairs, he wasn't. He was very
strict on who my friends were. And were your grade
reports checked by your parents? Oh, yes. That
certainly sounds familiar. They both signed. Mom
signed more than Dad. I still got them. But he
always checked. I mean, unless they were all A's,
it really wasn't acceptable. And there was no
doubt that you were going to go to college. Oh, it
was never a question. And the fact that you were
female going to college had nothing to do with how
important it was that you go. It wasn't. You know, I
don't know who at 18 really directed toward a
profession. And I remember talking to Dad. I loved
to sew. I loved home ec courses. I loved kids. And so
Dad said, well, you know, sister, just... go ahead
and go to education. And that way, if you'd ever
have to have something to fall back on. The thought
of a career really just didn't exist in the late
50s. As
your dad becomes settled into his job, Who were the
key people, as far as you know, that he turned to on
the campus for, who were his key subordinates? Who
did he rely upon? Well, you know about
subordinates. I guess I think about Ed Cooper and
Dorsey McCrory. Yeah, yeah. Tell me about those
people. You might believe I didn't know anything
about them. And I'm not sure at what point he's,
see, they may have even started assisting him
after I left. So. I just remember, I just remember
their dedication. Yeah, Ed was his assistant.
Uh-huh. Mm-hmm. And I just remember him just
always being there. Just...
I don't know that I can tell you anything specific.
We've carried on with the Coopers a lot. We've
flopped babysitters back and forth. And my kids
now babysat their grandkids. What about Dorsey
McClure? And the same thing. Ed was so personable
and so much fun. And he was, I don't know. I'm sure in
a lot of respects he was sort of like a son to dad.
Dorsey was more military. He was less personable.
Had they met during the service, your dad and
Dorsey? I have no idea. I have no idea. Because to
me, Dorsey was less warm, more businesslike. Oh,
the clerical, the secretary. Oh, Jerry Haught.
Describe her.
Jerry Haught and Nelda were just wonderful.
Would they have dared... speak candidly to your
dad if they thought he was about to, if the letter
didn't say what it should have said? Dad was very
well aware of his limitations in the King's
English. And he very much appreciated how
things looked. Some of the things when I... Dad was
really strict, and he was less strict with the
younger kids, but I've always said I love being one
of the older ones because my relationship with him
as an adult is just something I'd never trade for.
I know he depended on them very much, and they were
absolutely dedicated to him. I don't know what the
formula was, or if it was just in the man. Do you know
whether or not they were, were they there in the
office when he? I don't know. I don't either.
Because I'm thinking Nelda had to have been a
rather young woman at that time. because this is
now 40 years later. And she's still a young woman.
Did you have any association with Wayne Hall? You
know, I really didn't, and he has shared his
writings with Mother. And she loaned them to me for
a couple of days, and I didn't get through them, and
she wanted them back. I want to read what he has
written at some point. Let's go board members.
They were then called board of directors. They
weren't regents yet. Well, Doc Doherty was one,
wasn't he? We need a list. We have a list I can tell
you better. Sterling Evans, Zachary, Al Davies,
Dick Goodson. You know, Al Davies had been Dad's
roommate. Oh, I didn't know that. Yes. Do you know
any anecdotes from that? When Al Davies' folks
brought him to A&M, they opened the room that was
assigned, and it was full of mops and brooms, and
they thought surely they had been misdirected
because that was obviously the custodial closet.
But I think my dad at that point had the custodial
concessions. Oh, they were lifelong friends.
Because he would end up being the Sears and Roebuck
CEO. And even Mildred, when I came back to Texas in
1970 and... bought a Sears refrigerator. She came
by to see the babies, and I said, well, you know, I
bought a Sears refrigerator. She said, does it
work? If it doesn't, send it back. Let's see.
Another one of his classmates was a man named
Teague. Can you share any examples of their
relationship? Oh, gosh.
I think they would have done anything in the world
for one another. And were they close friends as
undergraduates? Yes. So not only were they
classmates, they were friends. Now Dad was older,
because not only did he go to Tarleton for two years
before coming here, but I think then he didn't, I
think he had to lay out and work a year, too. So he was
an older than average graduate when he left A&M.
Oh, that one, let's digress a second. about a milk
cow. Tell me your version of that story. Well, what
I hear was that that was part of his stipend, was to
bring the milk. And if the cow didn't provide, then
he had to stop by the water fountain on the way to the
mess hall. And that that was when one time when he
was short on money and might have to drop out of
school, that the coach came up with that idea. So I,
okay. When dad left Eden, my father's father,
mother said the other day, she said, well, my dad
called your dad's dad a commission man. that he
would, had you ever heard that term, a commission
man? And you know, it's sort of like a broker. And he
would broker land, or he would broker. On a
commission. On a commission. And when Dad left,
when Dad got the scholarship to Tarleton, he had a
very good job as a soda jerk at the Eden drug store.
And apparently my grandfather, Rudder, whom I
never knew, that he died before Mother and Dad
married, really didn't approve of Dad. He thought
he was making a big mistake leaving that fine job at
the drugstore. To go away. All right, now, your
mother's family already owned the ranch?